where was it that you first realized you
had a talent the math if it wasn't at
school as a child it didn't work
somewhat like that Collier was a fool
public school behind a relatively small
town in Canada just after the war
whether a shortage of teachers this
school leaving age was 15 and a large
number of people after repeating grades
once or twice left school at the age of
15 and worked in the lorry detailing and
this was a natural thing to do so is
happy you had every reason to think that
but you might do personally I met a
young lady then a different birth vision
of the world was probably influenced by
her yes and was introduced to someone
who had books left over from a socialist
period in the 30s and some of them were
books about science about various famous
scientists from the past and that got
you interested in science but when did
you realize that you had a real talent
or skill for mathematics science and
maths in particular I don't think I ever
realized that real talented mathematics
and not like that in other words they
did big IQ test ins they didn't announce
the results but they and so my height so
I had no idea what my IQ must I suspect
it was markedly larger than that almost
all the other students so we had an
English teacher and it was actually
really great English teacher and we were
a little bit of English villagers and I
he gave me a book to read and I read
that but my report was very bad and then
he just I didn't understand the meaning
of meaning in all
however this his teacher was must have
been aware of whatever score was tested
and he took an hour of school time to
speak to me in front of all the other
students and say I should go to
university
once it's because of this one teacher
basically said you are going to
university I said I explained their
other MP answers and probably you know a
natural I mean I made that competitive's
for the innings but he was the one who
made it clear to me that this was the
questions of possibility I never thought
of this possibility before at that time
interesting so you went to the
University of British Columbia yeah you
studied mathematics and what was there a
moment when you thought I love this
subject this is what I want to do so I
went badly of course would be able to
test for literature with the devil but
master Marik was stronger and I talked
it today when beginning student if you
talk to an advisor could imagine of
course mr. Tate and so on and they were
standard courses and he said what
to do an affinity well I said one
mathematician I said I want to be a
citizen assessment see other sciences of
course are difficult I don't think you
could be done sated biologist or a
chemist unless you have some previous
insight into what biology is chemistry
and you really turned up I think if you
don't have some previous conception of
what it is to be a citizen so but
mathematics is not the case it's just
easy so in any case I would have to well
first of all at the time but you have to
learn several languages you can't be a
mathematician
this is 1953 unless you know German
French Russian didn't even I tell you
took that seriously and standard courses
so what you say to that seriously you
taught yourself English languages for
the purposes of becoming money listen
you're pretty to pretend to teach
yourself but I did take him seriously
since that and I would say I had that
university I two different years one
second year and when I'm second fourth
year of instruction and Russia that was
very beautiful teacher not beautiful but
she was a president that work with young
woman but you were studying mathematics
in general what areas of mathematics
were you drawn to what did you start to
begin to I find I'm wired to learn it
off no as you say I mean my side correct
there you want to be about the did
mathematics well you also the Stoics
specialize he went to Yale to do your no
it never occurred I insisted never
occurred to me that I should specialize
maybe that is the reason why you're
well-known
very famous effect for joining kind of
two areas of math because you don't
actually see them as maybe different
areas you see math as an entirety rather
than as different in separate areas well
I haven't taken a survey of my
colleagues but I wouldn't think that a
large number of mathematicians share my
view they do the mathematics is is
mathematic there may be pressure from
your Dean or something the publisher
other than you focus right but if you
have any imagination
it just wants from the universe British
club he went to Yale and then went to
Princeton and that Princeton you started
to mix with people from it's about
studying which is where you are now
including the Norwegian Utley cell
beaucoup you've once said that meeting
him was your first professional contact
with a really first-class mathematician
and it was an experience you'll never
forget
for this Norwegian audience I wonder if
you can talk a little bit about your
relationship with him and how he
inspired it was the first conversation
which I had really excellent
mathematician which explained to me but
he was new me now I understood him
because I had read at some point my own
music and amusement basically to
American artists but relatively advanced
book on ordinary differential equations
I can value problems on the half line
and that was obviously more or less the
technique that Salford was used so it
was using so I understood silver because
of a kind of random reading that had
been done before in this case not very
long before in 1960
made the greatest breakthrough a
breakthrough which was a way to link to
different areas of mathematics
number theory really far before long
before eyes for general audience you can
explain what the breakthrough was that
that you made which has is normally
explained as linking these two areas I
can explain it but nobody tried to
decide of a certain situation there was
a still a sequence of problems in number
theory related to the number theory that
those problems with cows it solved as
the first step that almost the first
step in his career and people have
worked in that area developed over a
whole century more than a century the
latest advancements would make bubble by
Japanese sake but there are many Germans
and my particular also a very famous
name was art so there was what it's
called the health property section of
the abelian case being in case you
recognize the origin of the word
building yes we gotta be solved
take on yourself but there was remaining
more difficult problems of a non abelian
view they think people
so this was a problem that was higher
than very much at the front of our tans
questions are artists rather
mathematical ambitions and he had
basically thrown in the towel he said it
probably doesn't exist
we're not ever going to learn this
eventually makes gets you to the
breakthrough where you make these
conjectures yes essentially creating the
case that were possibly threw in the
towel I managed to basically prove it
for him
well what I want to insist upon us is
this mathematician of my just book
Buckner who said to me one day mid
August or late August that I was teach
of course on to the classical material
which I've just explained right and I
said well I can't do that because I
don't know anything about it and there's
only a week left he said no you're going
to do it so I gave him so because of him
and because of his pressure
I wonder one or two things as soon as I
came to Simpson and talked about a
certain topic he he said to me you must
do this at this this and I've basically
followed I didn't follow all suggestions
but all of them and so he was pushing me
further over and this led to making a
breakthrough which is for Lightman's
conjectures which is ultimately results
in the languages program which is a kind
of collective mathematical projects who
prove your conjectures which involves
hundreds of mathematicians over the last
50 odd years paraphrasing very quickly
cuz we've only got a few minutes left
well how do you feel about having given
rise to such an incredible
people say has changed the direction of
mathematics oh I don't know why don't
you do that well how do you look when
you look back at the conjecture the
human the beginnings of the conjecture
that you made in the 1960s and you see
how the field has changed what are your
feelings about how mathematics has has
come since then and your influence
within it and there's a big question
that we're only under Tiger there's
particular one on the question the other
prize is also to stimulate young
mathematicians into enjoying taking up
mathematics if you had a message for a
young mathematician about the subject
what would it be well my dad loved my
things that's an embarrassing question
but the obvious answer is be careful who
you listen to
explain what I said I said talking to
put a certain pressure on me and that
was very valuable I have a conversation
with Selberg that was variability but by
and large I did what I wanted to and the
texture that's the best thing to do do
what you want to do
you